---
title: JE Meeting 01/16/19
---

# JE Meeting 01/16/19

- conal call

- **JE:** Exegisis for Conal. Many people would like this. He would review and approve. TODO find past start of this and schedule time and see if it'll find

- turbine 7guis longer than expected but useful
- devtools talk after 25th

- Jan: Conal exigisis
Feb: canvas or svg hareactive, 7GUIs, beginning of devtools
TODO think this through more

- **JE:** build tool in parallel with 7GUIs so you can build it up step by step. you can also visualize the canvas hareactive with itself
- **JE:** very publishable. great research unit. builds on something already out there but better and different

- **JE:** great tablet for brainstorm. technical analysis for web stack problems they hit. couldn't get kind of animation they wanted to do. TODO find this. ask them who they are and that JE was wondering. he's really impressed 

- <Programming>: Salon de Refuge (Jan 7, April 1) Genoa, Italy
- <Programming>: PX/19 (Feb 1, April 1) Genoa, Italy
- PPIG (June-ish, Aug) UK
- SPLASH: Onward! (mid-April, end-Oct) Athens, Greece
- SPLASH: LIVE (June/July, end-Oct) Athens, Greece

TODO make sure I plan around going to PPIG. check calendar

- **SK:** What if I publish to you and internet that I will do it by the date or else?

- **JE:** I'm skeptical. maybe you need to bet $10 bucks.

- **SK:** end of Feb or March I should have good things to show. 

- **JE:** Could self publish an essay on this in early April? Maybe Onward! in early April but it's not the perfect fit but they'd consider it and you may get it and it's great validation. 

- **SK:** let's pencil in Onward for submission in April for conference in Oct in Athens...

- **JE:** or maybe Onward isn't the perfect fit.... Maybe REBLS... I dunno...
