---
title: Jonathan Edwards 6/14/18 11am ET
---

# Jonathan Edwards 6/14/18 11am ET

- Never heard of PPIG. What conferences do you go to? 
    - &lt;programming&gt; 
    - Strangeloop 
    - Splash LIVE 
    - Talk vs attending 
    - What value do you get? 
    - Do you schedule meetings? 

- Methodology problem (or is it a collaboration problem?) 
    - Coolness isn’t right criteria 
    - What about success of a project or methodology? 
    - Is the goal “getting ideas out there” (BV or Alan Kay) or transferring these ideas into a project (Haskell or Google)? 

- My current research direction 
    - Ultimate goal: truly open source software, where people can fork/customize their applications in real time. A world where 10% (instead of 0.01%) of users can edit their tools, would be a world with lots of amazing, free tools. 
        - Sub-goal: people be able to navigate and understand the relevant section of the project they are trying to modify, and make the modification 
            - Any 10x or 100x programmer has trouble with this.  
                - Files and folders. Ugh. What runs when? 
                - Imperative programming: need to read every line 

            - Solution:  
                - Remove all mutation from afar (explicit dependencies) 
                - Remove control flow 
                - Either FRP or synchronous languages 
                    - Then we’ll have a declarative specification that we can build visual metaphor abstractions on top of 

        - Other things we’ll need that I’m not thinking about 
            - A version control system that could handle many, many divergent forks 
            - A way to share data between applications - a more semantic format, maybe 
            - The visual metaphor layer 
            - The “editing” layer that lives in each application 
            - The hosting and permissioning, and accounts for each application 

    - Current challenges 
        - Explaining to my friends and family what I do - which isn’t hard when things are going well 
        - Making enough money, so I can live, but also have enough time for this 
        - Picking which problems to work on, and how they fit into a larger solution/vision 
        - Collaboration with others 
            - You’ve worked at MIT and YC research 
            - Haskell is such an interesting success story of collaboration around laziness 

        - Reading papers vs coming up with my own ideas 
        - Presenting work vs working on new ideas 
        - Conferences? 

- Notes 
    - Don’t read wadler 
    - [https://arxiv.org/abs/1803.10195](https://arxiv.org/abs/1803.10195) 
    - Notes on my direction 
        - Who hits wants 
        - It would be nice to point to a piece of code:  
            - what parts of the state does it depend on and what does it modify 

        - Subsetting the project enough so I can make some progress on it 
            - Pick a language to work within 

        - A issue we’re torn on:  
            - Nulls are formally messy but informally flexible and natural in some sense 
            - Andrew Myers from CMU HCI thinks nulls are natural 

        - Generally strategy: 
            - Yes tree-structured state 
                - We structure our UIs and code as trees already 
                - It’s easy to map dbs as trees (and no sql already is) 
                - We can unify all our data into one structure 
                - Tree data model programming language [https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ParaSail_(programming_language)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ParaSail_(programming_language)) 

            - No arbitrary graphs which can go any which way are too complicated: problems of pointers and heaps 


## Direct programming Notes

- Presentational 
    - I wouldn’t start by opening the base field. A better time may be when you should how you can drill down to any definition. 
    - Don’t need to explain the cursor location, action and optionally an argument 
    - The guiding principle: start with that, before explaining how the document works? 
        - Start with the goal of minimizing learning curve of beginner, then talk about how indirection is hard for them 

    - Sorry for getting the event invite in your video! 
    - How to evaluate the work 
        - See if it solves the indirection problem by teaching it to some students...? 

- Meat 
    - I wouldn’t call it “Past State: date”. Maybe just the date. I prefer the word “version” to “state” for end user programmers. 
    - I’d highlight the history and state with different colors. One should be a “selection color” and the other should be a “change was made here color” 
    - I think the no-op default is exactly what you don’t want. You want it to change anything, so I’d default them all to 2. 
    - I don’t like the right-click multiply. I think I’d much, much prefer having to type 3 * 5 in the a-number field, and then on enter or leaving the field, having it evaluate and then add the multiplication to the history. 
    - Why don’t you have to select both the x and + to get both lines to be a formula? Does it automatically do everything after this line? 
    - Why doesn’t it create a formula that takes an argument, and then supplies the argument? 
    - I don’t normally think of math as a set of steps... 
    - If you set a state to itself, maybe that should be recorded in the history? 
    - The semantics of if’s are weird 
    - The template element in lists is a bit strange 

- Compliments 
    - Being able to abstract over history to make a procedure is clever 
    - I really love how you can see every operation in a list loop, and how you can edit any iteration and it edits them all 
    - Very, very cool how you turned bug into code and also unit test 
    - The history is a script - I like this wordplay a lot

{% include analytics.html %}
