---
title: Research Recap Five
---

# Episode 9 - Research Recap Five

The last two-week-research-cycle was my most productive yet! In this recap, I debreif my Alan Kay deep dive, discuss tweaking my schedule after reading Peak, review conversations with Jaime Brandon and Dan Scanlon, read aloud my thoughts on proper computer use patterns and my prototype idea LogicHub, recap my early morning meeting with CycleJS creator Andre Staltz, and discuss the next steps for my StreamSheets prototype (which is why I'm putting my Bret Victor deep dive on pause).

<iframe src="https://omny.fm/shows/future-of-coding/9-research-recap-five/embed" width="100%" height="180" frameborder="0"></iframe>

## Notes

*   [You can find more notes and links for this podcast here.](http://futureofcoding.org/journal#research-recap-5)
*   Apologize for no episode last week, working on getting two interviews out the door (Pete and Paul), and should be soon.
*   Podcast Analytics - It says my number of suscribers grew from ~50 to ~130 in the past two weeks! Most of the growth seemed to happen between August 31 and Sept 1, which is interesting because I didn't publish anything in that timeframe. It looks like people have been starting with episode 1 and then go straight to the most recent episode, which is currently 8. In total, I have had 156 people listen to episodes, 403 episode downloads, with most people listening on iPhones, most from America, but like 100 (which is shocking to me) other countries, broken down by a few dozen from Canada, France, Brazil, UK, Spain and Singapore.
*   Website Analytics - Probably the most interesting metrics are monthly, weekly and daily active users. I have 245 monthly active users, 35 weeks, and 6 daily. This is very exciting to me that I have a even a single person (let alone 5) other than me that come to my website every day! It's basically only US visitors, half phone and half desktop. Not surprisingly, people who find me via organic search, bounce the least. In the last 28 days, I've had 394 sessions, with a bounce rate of 67%, and 1m31s session duration, with a huge spike on the launch date, settling with higher but still pretty low daily viewage.
*   Love peak from Jaime Brandon. 1) get a teacher. 2) debugging (here and on stevekrouse.com), such as my schedule. I started doing my research from 7:30-10:30am every morning with the help of coffee and going to bed by 11pm. Working so far! When I need to, I can make a day's research longer or shorter as long as I adjust the other ones. I want to be more precise here eventually.
*   Had a fun call with Dan Scanlon last week. He's all about the "thinking in public" idea.
*   He helped me articulate the current state of my research, with StreamSheets.
*   I invited him, as well as Jaime to the NYC Future of Coding meetup and Slack. We'd love more members so reach out if you'd like to be added!
*   I've been having a lot of fun with the Alan Kay deep dive. TODO
*   STEPS is eerily similar to StreamSheets in both goals and implementation.
*   Reflections on overlapping windows.
*   LogicHub
*   Bret Victor Deep Dive
*   Call with Andre just a few hours ago. Similar to Eve's approach from a number of years ago. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5V1ynVyud4M
*   He and Nick Bostrom are working on a similar-ish idea.
*   Next steps with research